{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Italic;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 .SFNS-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Final 5%: When (and When Not) to Fix It in Mastering\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 By Alexander Wright\

\f0\i0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 It\'92s tempting to think of mastering as the final touch. But sometimes, the most powerful move is doing nothing at all. \outl0\strokewidth0 Mastering, in my experience, is as much about knowing when to intervene as it is about technical finesse. By the time a mix reaches the mastering stage, most of the big decisions have been made. It\'92s tempting to think that one last tweak\'97the final 5%\'97might turn a good song into a great one. But often, the real job is resisting that urge, understanding which tiny adjustments truly serve the music, and which ones might rob it of its soul.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Mastering teaches patience. We remind ourselves that our primary mission is not to fix the mix or showcase our own skills, but to facilitate the artist\'92s vision. Early in my career, I was eager to sculpt and polish every track. Over time, I learned that great mastering often looks like doing nothing at all. The best masters tend to disappear. The goal is a final product where the music speaks, not the engineer.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 The Art of Restraint
\f2\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 In mastering, less is almost always more. I follow a simple rule: change as little as necessary. If it isn\'92t broken, don\'92t fix it. Perhaps a mix has a boomy low end or an overly bright top, but sometimes it doesn\'92t. Sometimes the first instinct is to reach for a big EQ boost or heavy compression, but good mastering is more about subtle shifts. It\'92s like adjusting the color palette of a film, not changing the edit itself.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 I recall an early case with an indie ballad \'97 a whisper-quiet song about heartbreak and loss. The mix engineer gave me a delicate track with soft guitar strums and vocals so intimate you could hear the artist\'92s breath. It had a gentle beauty, but the vocalist\'92s breath was a tiny bit loud, and there was a faint hiss in the background. In the studio, I found myself turning up the volume to really feel the music, and that background noise became more apparent. The instinct was to apply a noise gate or de-hum filter. But doing so would have snatched away the song\'92s intimacy.\
Instead, I took a much gentler approach: a surgical parametric cut on the loudest breaths, and a very light downward expansion that left plenty of breathing space. The final master still had a bit of ambience and grain, but without the distracting hiss.\
That moment taught me a lot about the final 5%. If I had cranked a broadband compressor or aggressively gated every noise, the track might have become technically cleaner, but it would have sounded sterile. The emotional resonance would have been lost. For that song, I learned that patience was more valuable than heavy-handed editing. Trust the musical intent: sometimes an imperfection in the mix is part of the fabric of the song. But restraint isn\'92t always obvious in practice\'97especially when a mix arrives with more apparent flaws.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 When Fixing Hurts More Than It Helps\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Not all sessions are so subtle. Some mixes have obvious issues: a tilt towards harshness, muddiness in the mids, or an overbearing low end. The challenge is deciding when to step in. Remember that mastering is the final polish, not a remix. If something feels fundamentally off, ask if it might be a mix problem in need of revision.\
One harsh lesson for me came with a rock track featuring a lead vocal from a vintage tube mic. It had grit and character \'97 exactly what the band loved \'97 but at higher volumes the vocal became rough around the edges. By the time I got the bounce, the highs were already hitting the ceiling. My first thought was to reach for an EQ to tame the offending frequencies. But big cuts in the mids could rob the vocal of its warmth, and a heavy de-esser would flatten the tone too much. I had to judge which was a more important thing to chase: technical polish or the character that the band adored.\
In this case, the grit was part of the charm. Rather than massacre it, I opted for a very gentle midrange shelf and a hint of parallel compression to add presence without smothering the dynamics. The result was a vocal that still sounded raw and alive, but sat better in the mix. The band was thrilled, and the vocal retained its soul. That session taught me that sometimes trying to \'93fix\'94 what\'92s already characterful can do more harm than good.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Trust Your Ears, Not the Meters\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Another turning point came with a dance mix plagued by low-end woes. The kick drum was solid, but the sub frequencies (around 30Hz) were overwhelming, rumbling the entire track. The mix engineer said it was subtle, but once I heard it, I knew it needed attention. At first I thought a quick high-pass filter or narrow cut might solve it. But I worried: would a fix at 30Hz mask a deeper issue, and could it drain the track\'92s energy?\
So I tried something different: a subtle shelf EQ at 40Hz. It cleaned up the rumble just enough without sucking the life out of the kick. The difference was night and day: the track lost its muddiness but still felt powerful. I was tempted to stare at the analyzer \'96 the meter showed a flat bottom end, apparently perfect. But I reminded myself, listening is believing. On speakers, the track still slaps. On headphones, it still thumps. The fix worked, not because the meter smiled, but because it sounded good.\
The lesson here is simple: trust the music more than any meter reading. Engineers can obsess over flat frequency response, but listeners feel impact more than they analyze waveforms. A little precision EQ-ing in context can do wonders, but only if you let the sound be the final judge. In that session, I merely nudged the mix and let the groove take care of the rest.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 The Psychology of Over-Processing\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Beyond the gear and meters, the trickiest part can be mastering your own mindset. Working on the final 5% is as much psychological as it is technical. When you\'92re close to done, it\'92s easy to become overly self-critical. I\'92ve sat through countless mastering sessions thinking, 
\f1\i \'93What if I can make it just perfect?\'94
\f2\i0  \'97 only to discover that mindset can lead to diminishing returns. Keep redoing the take and you\'92ll chase the magic right out of it. The same can happen in mastering.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The urge to perfect can sometimes sterilize the very thing that gives a song life. Listen closely to Keith\'92s guitar part in 
\f1\i Satisfaction
\f2\i0 \'97you can hear stomp box clicks and tiny slips in timing. No one \'93fixed\'94 them, and thank god they didn\'92t. That rawness is part of the feel. It\'92s proof that sometimes the best move is to leave the mess alone.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 If I find myself tweaking and re-tweaking, I take a break. I might listen in my car, through earbuds, or on the phone speaker. Maybe I need some silence and a walk outside. Usually, I realize the music still stands strong, and any \'93problems\'94 weren\'92t as bad or as difficult as I thought.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Communication still matters, even from a distance. I often ask artists or mixers, \'93At what point does it feel right to you?\'94 If they reply saying they got goosebumps or found themselves tapping along, that\'92s usually a good sign we\'92re close. Mastering is a support role. If the artist starts pushing back on every small change, that\'92s often your cue to stop. Getting an outside perspective reminds me that sometimes, a bit of imperfection is fine if it means preserving the song\'92s emotion.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 When to Step Back\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ultimately, deciding what to fix comes down to musical purpose. If an issue is truly hindering the song\'92s emotion or clarity, it deserves attention. But if it\'92s merely a technical quibble, consider letting it be. I stick by a simple rule: only make changes that serve the music.\
For instance, say a guitar track in the mix is a hair muddy. I could carve it up with surgical EQ or multi-band compression, but that might sacrifice warmth and body. Sometimes it\'92s better to live with a small amount of mud than end up with a brittle sound. Similarly, if a vocal is a touch quiet, I might ride its level or do subtle compression, but blasting it forward by cranking everything else up could make the track feel unnatural.\
Wield your tools with intention, not reckless abandon. Digital gear lets you make precise moves, but music isn\'92t an equation \'97 it\'92s about feel. By stepping back and thinking in musical terms, you often find that what seemed like a problem on the screen is less noticeable in the song.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 A Few Simple Rules I Try to Follow
\f2\b0 \

\f0\b \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fix with Purpose:
\f2\b0  Use EQ and compression only when it serves the song's emotion. Don\'92t \'93correct\'94 a sound that is part of the vibe.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Be Minimal:
\f2\b0  Often, the smallest tweaks have the biggest impact. A tiny EQ nudge or subtle dynamic change can go a long way.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Trust Your Ears:
\f2\b0  Meters and scopes are tools, but if it sounds right in context, it probably is. Let what you hear guide you more than any readout.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Communicate:
\f2\b0  Collaboration with the artist and mixer is vital. They know the vision \'96 make sure your changes align with it.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Take Breaks:
\f2\b0  Rest your ears. A fresh listen can reveal whether the track was already fine or if you truly needed that tweak.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Thinking in Context\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Even when I\'92m mastering just one track, I try to imagine the bigger picture. How will this sit in a playlist? Will it be part of an EP or a full-length album? The final 5% isn\'92t just about what a song needs in isolation\'97it\'92s about what it needs to survive in the world for years to come. A track might sound rich and full on its own, but placed back-to-back with others, it can suddenly feel overbearing or flat. I\'92ve had cases where a bass-heavy mix felt great solo but disrupted the pacing of an album. Using my tools, I can transfer that bass energy to other areas of the track where it adds body. Other times, I\'92ve dialed back the brightness on one song\'97not because it was \'93wrong,\'94 but because it needed to yield space to what came next.\
This isn\'92t a new idea. In the vinyl era, sequencing and tonal flow were fundamental, and engineers would shape sides of a record to feel cohesive, not just sonically but emotionally. Loudness had to be managed carefully across the side to avoid inner groove distortion. Even in the CD era, where format limits eased, mastering engineers often treated the album as a journey, ensuring each track spoke to the next. Today, streaming playlists have become the new battleground for continuity, with songs living in dynamic, algorithmically-driven environments. But the goal remains: cohesion. Mastering isn\'92t just polishing\'97it\'92s sequencing, shaping, and creating a flow that feels intentional. Whether you\'92re finalizing an album or just hoping your single lands gracefully between two others on Spotify, context always matters.\outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Conclusion: Serving the Song\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Mastering is ultimately an act of service to the song. And service sometimes means knowing when to stop tinkering. The final 5% of any project is as much about judgment and respect as it is about EQ curves and limiters.\
In my career, I\'92ve found that letting the music breathe often yields masters that resonate far longer than the loudest version ever could. If listeners feel magic in the song \'97 a goosebump, a memory, a thrill \'97 then the mastering engineer has done their job. We can spend hours finessing frequencies, but if the end result still moves someone, you\'92ve succeeded.\
So the next time you\'92re teetering on that razor\'92s edge of edits, ask yourself: is this really serving the music\'97or just serving my need to feel useful? If it\'92s the latter, maybe it\'92s best to keep your hands off and let the song shine on its own. If it moves someone, you\'92ve done your job. The rest is noise.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \uc0\u11835 
\f2 \
\

\f0\b Alexander Wright
\f2\b0  is a mastering engineer based in Seattle. He has worked on over 1,600 releases and is the author of 
\f1\i The Wright Balance Method: A Philosophy of Mastering, Listening, and Letting Go
\f2\i0 . Learn more at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://alexanderwright.com"}}{\fldrslt alexanderwright.com}}.}