{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 The Mastering Mind: Structure, Sensitivity, and Sound\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 By 
\f2\i Alexander Wright
\f1\i0 \
\
I used to think I had to fix myself before I could build something real. I spent years feeling like a broken instrument \'97 out of tune with the world, waiting to be repaired. In crowded rooms I\'92d shrink into silence, overwhelmed by the crush of voices and bright lights. On the outside I wore the mask of a quiet overachiever, sometimes the class clown, but internally every sound and sensation was magnified. I was hypersensitive, obsessive, perfectionistic. Too much, I thought. Too emotional, too odd, too sensitive to ever create something that mattered. I truly believed I needed to become \'93normal\'94 before I could pursue my passion for music.\
\
What I didn\'92t know then was that I am neurodivergent. And the very things I once saw as defects \'97 my acute sensitivity, my meticulous attention to detail, my need for calm amidst chaos \'97 would eventually become my greatest assets. But that realization didn\'92t come easily. In my early years I tried so hard to fit in that I was continually drained of all energy. I memorized scripts for social situations, studying classmates and functional adults and mirroring their small talk just to pass as okay. I hid my quirks: the way a flickering fluorescent light could give me a splitting headache, or how I\'92d get unreasonably anxious if my routines were disrupted. I remember suffering through panic attacks in bathrooms and stairwells, in the train on the way to school, willing myself to get it together like everyone else seemed to manage so easily. I thought success meant being loud and fast and extroverted, and I was none of those things.\
\
Music was my one refuge even then. As a teenager, I\'92d escape into sound whenever the world became too much. I\'92d slip on headphones and let albums carry me to a place where I could breathe. I was overwhelmed by the world, and steadied by sound. I vividly recall my eyes tearing up as \'93Moth\'94 by Burial and Four Tet played in my earbuds and I watched the long journey to and from my high school pass in a blur of longing through the train window. Our brains don\'92t just process sound. We feel it. We decode it. For neurodivergent engineers, that decoding goes even deeper.\
\
The gentle hiss of vinyl, the precision of a well-placed note, the way a mix could create its own little universe \'97 I lived for those details. It was the one thing that took no effort or fakery on my part. Late at night when the city finally went quiet, I\'92d be in my room tinkering with recordings, losing myself in waveforms and frequencies, listening to and reading obsessively about anything and everything to do with music. Back then I didn\'92t have a name for what I was doing. I just knew that when I was deep in the emotional landscape of great music, my body stopped shaking. My racing thoughts would slow to a single point of focus. In those moments, I felt a stillness and agency I never felt elsewhere.\
\
Mastering as a Still Refuge\
\
It took me years to realize that this private world of sound could become not just my hobby, but my home. Mastering music turned out to be the refuge I never knew I was searching for. When I step into my private, quiet studio, I step into safety. The outside world might be loud and unpredictable, but here in this space, there is stillness. The room is calm and controlled: soft lighting, soft textures, everything in its right place. I close the door, and it\'92s just me and the song. In that stillness I have the freedom to be myself completely \'97 sensitive, particular, wide-open ears and heart \'97 and pour all of that into the music. Sometimes I start singing along and dancing like an idiot. Those are usually the best songs, the best masters.\
Mastering is often seen as a technical process, the final polish on a recording. But to me, it\'92s almost meditative. It\'92s a ritual of slowing down and listening deeply while caring just as deeply. I listen not just for what\'92s obvious in a track, but for what\'92s hiding beneath: the subtle heartbeat of the song. I\'92ll sit with a mix and notice the tiniest details \'97 a ghost of a reverb tail, a barely perceptible swell of emotion when the chorus hits. In those details I find meaning and soul. Adjusting a compressor threshold or nudging an EQ by half a decibel isn\'92t just an engineering task; it\'92s an act of care. It\'92s my way of bringing harmony to something that felt unaligned. With each tiny decision, I feel a sense of control and clarity that daily life often denies me.\
In the mastering studio, I have agency. I can take a song that comes in rough or timid and help it bloom into its fullest form. I can make choices \'97 subtle or bold \'97 and immediately hear their impact. For someone who once felt powerless over panic attacks and sensory overload, this ability to shape sound feels deeply empowering. It\'92s a gentle kind of control: not control over people or unpredictable events, but over frequencies, dynamics, the emotional arc of a piece of music. And even this control comes with a paradox I love: the best mastering is often about letting go. It\'92s knowing when not to push, when the song simply needs space to breathe. In that sense, mastering heavily overlaps into the practice of mindfulness. I guide the music, yes, but I also yield to it, allowing the song\'92s intent to lead.\
\
Most of all, mastering has become my voice. I\'92m not a loud person, but in the mastering process I can speak through careful choices. Each fade-out, each balanced level is a word in a language of emotion.\
When I can shape a track until it feels right \'97 until the sound matches the soul of the song \'97 I feel understood, even if no one else is watching. The final listener may never know what I did; in fact (if I\'92ve done my job well) the listener simply feels the music hit deeper without knowing why. But I know. In those 10,000 quiet hours at the console, I take all that I am \'97 my sensitivity, my empathy, my obsessive care \'97 and I give it to the music. Mastering, to me, is a sanctuary where all the traits that once isolated me become a means of connection. It\'92s a place where being \'93too much\'94 in the world just means being thorough and devoted to the art in front of me.\
\
The Gift of Sensitivity\
\
Ironically, the very qualities I once cursed about myself are what make me a good mastering engineer. I\'92ve come to think of these qualities as a collective gift of sensitivity born from my autism. Not everyone notices the things we notice. Not everyone feels music in their body like a physical presence, or gets goosebumps from a tiny shift in pitch, tone, or harmony. That hypersensitivity \'97 emotional and sensory \'97 means I hear what others might miss. The micro-emotions hidden in a singer\'92s breath, the way a snare drum\'92s tone effects the whole mood of a song, the slight warble in a sustained note that conveys vulnerability. These are the kinds of details neurodivergent ears can catch like secret messages. In mastering, nothing is too subtle to matter. My sensitivity finds a purpose here.\
\
I\'92ll give an example: I was mastering a delicate indie folk track not long ago, and there was a moment where the reverb on the final piano chord lingered less than a half-second too long. Almost a dead space, incongruous with the arrangement and dynamics of the song. Most people wouldn\'92t have heard it as an issue at all, but to me it felt like a tiny emotional cloud obscuring the song\'92s last ray of light. That\'92s the kind of thing my ears lock onto \'97 I feel that lingering reverb as a slight tension in my chest. So I automated a gentle and very precise fade to let the silence reclaim its space a touch sooner. It was a microscopic change, invisible to almost everyone, but it allowed the song\'92s final exhale to shine through with clarity. The artist later told me they weren\'92t sure why, but the ending felt more poignant and \'93final\'94. This is the invisible labor of mastering: the accumulation of minuscule choices that honor the music\'92s feeling. And it\'92s work perfectly suited to a sensitive soul.\
\
My perfectionism, when handled with care, also turns out to be an asset. I\'92ve learned to balance it (I call my approach \'93The Wright Balance Method\'94 half-jokingly) so that it doesn\'92t paralyze me, but instead drives a high standard. The truth is, I will obsess over the smallest details in a mix. I\'92ll compare the impact of a 0.2 dB boost at 6 kHz versus 0.3 dB, if I believe it matters (and it always matters). That kind of fine-grained focus might sound extreme, but in mastering, it can be the difference between a track that feels merely good and one that feels transcendent. Being a bit OCD about details means I catch glitches before they become problems. It means I notice if a fade-out isn\'92t perfectly smooth or if the left channel is 0.1 dB louder than the right. Instead of these tendencies holding me back, here they give me an edge in quality and consistency. I\'92ve had mixes sent to me that were already great, and sometimes my most important decision is to change nothing at all. But even that restraint comes from the same sensitive tuning \'97 I only know not to intervene because I\'92m intensely in touch with the music\'92s intention.\
\
Neurodivergence often comes with what I call superpowers of focus. When I\'92m in the zone with a song, hours can pass without me noticing. That intense, hyper-focused state is where some of my most productive work happens. It\'92s like the rest of the world drops away and every neuron I have is aligned with the sound. In those moments, I am not \'93scatterbrained\'94 or \'93too intense\'94 as I sometimes felt in other jobs or social settings. I\'92m laser sharp and deeply intuitive. What some might label obsession, I frame as devotion. It\'92s the kind of deep work that mastering not only allows but requires. And because I naturally live in the details, this \'93invisible\'94 work of polishing audio feels visible and vivid to me. Each subtle change is satisfying. Each time I catch a nearly inaudible pop or soften a sibilant S without dulling the vocal, I get a little surge of joy. It\'92s like solving a puzzle that no one else even knew was there.\
\
Sensitivity is a gift in this line of work because mastering isn\'92t about adding sparkle or making a track loud for loudness\'92 sake. It\'92s about reading the emotional story of a song and making sure nothing gets in its way. My neurodivergent mind, attuned to patterns and nuances, is exceptionally good at that kind of reading. I can sense when a mix feels anxious or unbalanced and methodically bring it back to center. I can also tell when a mix feels honest and whole, and has to be left mostly as-is. That intuition comes from years of feeling emotions intensely and learning to navigate them. In a way, mastering someone\'92s music is a collaborative empathy: I put myself in the artist\'92s skin, feel what they felt, and use technical means to amplify that feeling for the listener. Every time I succeed in doing that, it\'92s a quiet affirmation that my sensitivity is not only normal \'97 it\'92s needed.\
\
Healing in the Final Touch\
\
There\'92s another side to why mastering became my refuge: it has been healing for me, not just for the music. Finalizing a song is a surprisingly emotional act. I often say that mastering is the final act of care we give a piece of music before we send it off to the world. Early in my career, I was terrified of finishing things. My perfectionism made me cling to projects, tweaking endlessly, scared to call anything \'93done.\'94 (How could it be done if it wasn\'92t absolutely perfect? And here\'92s the Catch-22: nothing ever truly feels perfect to a perfectionistic mind.) This is a feeling many neurodivergent creatives know well \'97 the finish line can be the hardest part of the race. Because finishing means letting go. It means whatever you\'92ve created will stand on its own, open to whatever reaction comes. Open to praise, criticism, even ridicule. That vulnerability used to send me into a panic. I remember at Berklee abandoning my own creativity or delaying sharing my songs for months, simply because I couldn\'92t bear the idea of them being judged, or worse, ignored. My identity was so intertwined with my work that releasing it felt like exposing a piece of my soul.\
\
Mastering has gently taught me a healthier relationship with endings. In the mastering role, I\'92m a step removed \'97 I\'92m not the original artist of the song, but I care for it as if it were my own. I guide it to completion on behalf of someone else, which has oddly helped me learn how to do the same for myself. With each project I finalize, I practice the art of mindfully letting go. I apply the last touches, listen one more time, and then I have to release it. I send it off with the hope that it brings the artist peace and the listeners joy. And then I move on. There is a quiet, satisfying closure in that process that I\'92ve come to love. It\'92s still not easy \'97 every time I hit \'93Send\'94 on that final pass I take a breath and feel that familiar rush of excitement and nerves. But it\'92s a good kind of vulnerability now, a reminder that completion is an achievement, not a tragedy.\
\
In helping others cross the finish line, I\'92ve learned to find closure in my own creative journey. I\'92ve internalized that a project can be beautifully imperfectand still be ready, still be \'93real.\'94 In fact, part of my job is often to preserve a little bit of imperfection when it serves the song\'92s humanity. That has been a revelation: the flaws aren\'92t always flaws. Sometimes the slightly raw vocal or the subtle string squeak on a guitar is exactly what makes the music alive. I used to apply that understanding only to audio, but I\'92ve started to apply it to myself. The parts of me I thought I had to fix \'97 my anxious edges, my quiet nature \'97 maybe those aren\'92t flaws either. Maybe they are features of a unique design. Mastering music has been like mastering self-acceptance in slow motion. With each track, I practice caring for something without overruling its nature, and in doing so I\'92ve slowly learned how to treat myself the same way: with a little more compassion, a little less judgment.\
\
Finalization, I\'92ve found, is as emotional as it is technical. There\'92s a moment in nearly every project where I feel the song \'93become itself.\'94 It might be after a subtle adjustment or even after deciding to leave a challenging mix alone. Suddenly, the track blossoms \'97 it feels whole and confident and done. In that moment, I often feel a lump in my throat or a spark of quiet joy. It\'92s not just the relief of completing a task; it\'92s a sense of witnessing something true emerge. It feels like healing. It reminds me of all the times I was afraid to finish things because I was afraid they wouldn\'92t be perfect. And here I am, embracing \'93done\'94 as a beautiful state, a state where the music can finally go and live its life in the hands of its maker, and I can step back with pride. Each finished master is a small lesson in trust: trust that I\'92ve done enough, trust that the art will speak for itself, trust that letting go is part of the process.\
\
Invisible Work, Quiet Defiance\
\
We live in a world that celebrates hustle and spectacle. The louder you shout and the faster you move, the more you seem to get noticed. As an artist and engineer who thrives in the quiet, hidden corners, I\'92ve often felt out of step with that culture. For a long time, I thought I was doing it wrong \'97 in-person networking didn\'92t come naturally to me, self-promotion made me break out in sweat, and I preferred spending an afternoon fine-tuning one song over churning out ten for quick social media content. I\'92ve come to realize that my way of working is a quiet defiance of the hustle-obsessed \'93grindset\'94 so many engineers have, and I\'92m okay with that. In fact, I\'92m proud of it.\
\
Mastering is almost the definition of invisible work. When it\'92s done well, no one notices what was changed \'97 they only feel that the music sounds right. A mastering engineer\'92s touch isn\'92t flashy. It won\'92t land in a viral Instagram reel. I don\'92t earn royalties, so my interest stays purely with the music itself. Every project is truly equal. My work happens in solitude, in the quiet hours when no one is watching, often anonymized behind the artist\'92s public release. And yet, this invisible work is my contribution to the world of music, and it matters. There\'92s a line I wrote in my journal once, a reminder to myself: Invisible work, done with care, matters more than anything that trends. I hold that close to my heart. It\'92s a reminder that value isn\'92t always measured in likes or loudness. Sometimes value is in the goosebumps a listener feels without knowing why, or the confidence an artist gains because their song finally sounds \'93complete\'94 in a way they can\'92t articulate.\
\
Choosing this path, I\'92ve quietly pushed back against the idea that one must constantly prove their worth in visible ways. There\'92s pressure out there to constantly grind, to turn every passion into content, every moment into a performance. For neurodivergent creators like me, that pressure can be soul-crushing. We might not thrive in constant noise; we shine in focused depth. We find meaning in the unseen layers of the work. Mastering has taught me that doing less, more thoughtfully, can carry more impact than doing a hundred things for the sake of doing. It\'92s a slower life, and a gentler one. I don\'92t chase clout or awards with my work (if they come, great, but that\'92s not the goal). My success looks different: it\'92s the steady accumulation of small, meaningful improvements to songs I care about; the stack of thank-you emails from artists who felt truly heard in the process; the inner knowledge that I\'92ve stayed true to myself.\
\
In a way, every time I sit in the mastering chair and focus intently on a tiny detail no one else might ever hear, I feel like I\'92m asserting that this matters. Care matters. Presence matters. To pay attention in a world that\'92s rushing \'97 this is my rebellion. It\'92s a quiet one, yes, but it feels almost radical these days to work quietly and pour your heart into the unseen. I used to worry I wasn\'92t \'93doing enough\'94 in the eyes of the industry or through the tainted lens of social media, but I\'92ve learned to measure productivity on my own terms: Was I present? Did I give the music what it needed? Did I honor the artist\'92s trust and my own standards? If yes, that is a day well spent.\
\
And something beautiful happens when you embrace invisible work \'97 you start to find a community of others doing the same. I\'92ve met fellow neurodivergent creatives who are editors, behind-the-scenes producers, luthiers, writers, all quietly mastering their craft out of love and dedication. We might not be the ones grabbing headlines, but we recognize each other in subtle ways. There\'92s a kinship in the quiet nod, the understanding that we\'92re all part of making something real and meaningful, even if the credit is silent. That companionship, even from afar, is deeply validating. It reminds me that I\'92m not alone on this slower, softer road.\
\
A Gentle Affirmation\
\
I\'92m writing this because I know what it\'92s like to yearn for recognition or understanding, especially when you feel different from the crowd. If you are a neurodivergent creator reading this \'97 someone who feels too much, or struggles to be seen in the noise \'97 I want to share a simple truth: You are not broken, and you\'92re not alone. There is a place for you, even if you have to carve it out gently, even if you have to build it quietly behind closed doors at first. It might be in mastering like me, or it might be in another corner of creativity altogether. Wherever it is, your unique way of experiencing the world can be a refuge not just for you, but for others who experience your art.\
\
I used to think I had to fix myself to amount to anything. Now I know that my job isn\'92t to fix myself \'97 it\'92s to build myself: to build a life and a practice that authentically honors who I am. Mastering became that practice, that refuge, for me. It\'92s where I discovered that what I thought were cracks in my character were really channels for empathy, creativity, and insight. I found a companionship in music and the musical community that often eluded me elsewhere. And in caring for songs, I learned to care for myself.\
\
I hope my story can be a companion to you in return. If you\'92ve felt out of place, consider this essay a calm room where we\'92re sitting together, listening to a song we both love, nodding in understanding without having to say a word. Sometimes a subtle, invisible touch can transform a piece of music. In the same way, a subtle shift in how you see yourself \'97 recognizing the value of your sensitivity, your perspective, your way of working \'97 can transform your creative journey.\
\
Your work, however invisible or unconventional it might be, matters. Your way of working matters. Now more than ever, the world needs the kind of humanity, care, and depth you bring, even if it doesn\'92t always know how to ask for it. So keep going. Find refuge in your craft, and know that someone out there (hi, it\'92s me) is grateful for the quiet magic you\'92re contributing. In the grand noisy mix of life, your careful ears and caring heart are creating a balance that makes it all a little more beautiful, a little more bearable. And that, to me, is everything.}