{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Italic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-BoldItalic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Why Mastering Feels Like Home: A Personal Reflection
\f1\b0 \
by 
\f2\i Alexander Wright
\f1\i0 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\f3\i\b \cf0 \'93The privilege of a lifetime is to become who you truly are.\'94\
\
\'97 Carl Jung
\f1\i0\b0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
I\'92ve always worked better in the quiet.\
\
Not just literal silence, but the kind of spaciousness that lets you think clearly, listen deeply, and stay with a task until it feels complete. That might be why I found my way to mastering\'97and why I\'92ve stayed.\
\
This isn\'92t a traditional origin story. There\'92s no big break, no viral moment, no shouty social strategy. Just a long, steady rhythm of refining things: myself, my process, and the way I serve other people\'92s music.\
\
I was born in Frankston, Australia in 1993, but I grew up across a constellation of landscapes\'97Melbourne, Bordeaux, Fiji. My early years were shaped by contrast and motion: a quiet, overly aware child in loud environments. A kid with the intellect of an adult and the sensitivity of a poet, not sure where to put either. I loved music. I loved silence. I loved details most people skipped over. And I felt the world too strongly\'97too much, I was told, in ways I couldn\'92t quite fix.\
\
By the time I reached adulthood, I was already masking heavily\'97high-achieving on the outside, often the quiet overthinker or class clown, but inwardly isolated. It wasn\'92t until much later that I began to understand the spectrum wiring beneath it all. I wasn\'92t broken\'97just different. Just tuned to a different frequency.\
\
I came to music not by decision, but by pull\'97naturally, urgently, with reverence. I studied Music Production and Engineering at Berklee College of Music and graduated in 2020\'97right in the thick of COVID. While much of my class scattered or pivoted, I quietly began building. I didn\'92t chase a flashy studio job or move to LA. I didn\'92t want to become a cog in someone else\'92s machine.\
\
Instead, I focused on mastering.\
\
It suited me perfectly. The solitude. The precision. The way it required both sensitivity and detachment. Mastering, at its best, is not about ego\'97it\'92s about perspective. And that\'92s what I\'92ve tried to cultivate ever since. Not just a service, but a philosophy.\
\
Over the past few years, I\'92ve mastered over 1,700 tracks. Some on major labels. Some for bedroom artists just starting out. But regardless of scale, I approach all of it with the same care: searching for balance, depth, clarity, and restraint. \'93The Wright Balance Method,\'94 as I\'92ve come to call it, isn\'92t a gimmick. It\'92s my way of finishing things well.\
\
Finalization isn\'92t just technical\'97it\'92s emotional. And if I\'92m doing it right, the artist hears their work clearly and completely for the first time, without anxiety or confusion. Pure clarity.\
\
Behind the console\'97and behind any public-facing stats or Apple Digital Masters certification\'97is a much more complicated reality.\
\
I\'92m a dual citizen now\'97Australian by birth, American by marriage. I live in Seattle with my wife Maya, who lives with chronic illness. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, jugular compression, a feeding tube. It\'92s been an intense and often isolating journey, one that\'92s forced us into a rhythm many people wouldn\'92t understand.\
\
It\'92s not the life we pictured when we met. But it\'92s ours. And I meant every word of my vows. Through sickness and health.\
\
There\'92s a steadiness that\'92s come from it. Not the kind that comes from ease, but the kind forged in responsibility. Days at home. Nights editing waveforms while she sleeps. Walks with our dog Ozzy\'97an Aussiedoodle who somehow contains both comic relief and spiritual grounding. A couple of gin and tonics each night. Always the music. Always the quiet.\
\
I\'92ve built a life not from performance, but from principle.\
\
The Alexander Wright Mastering logo \'97 a stylized waveform shaped from my initials, co-designed with my father to symbolize balance, clarity, and care.\
\
\'93Monk mode,\'94 I sometimes call it\'97the introspective rhythm I\'92ve kept while the industry has gotten louder and faster around me. I don\'92t do hype. I don\'92t chase virality. I still believe, as I wrote in this piece, that sound has the power to move us in ways no algorithm can predict. So I\'92ve spent years refining the small details of my craft, from the practice itself to my order process, my communication, my site, my logo, my tone.\
\
In 2025, I finally felt like my public presence matched what clients had long told me privately: that I\'92m not just technically strong\'97I care. Deeply. And that emotional trust is why people come back.\
\
I\'92m not hiding in the quiet. I\'92m rooted there.\
\
I don\'92t think of mastering as a transaction. I don\'92t think of myself as a brand. When you hire me, you\'92re not getting a preset chain or a junior engineer. You\'92re getting me. My ears, my taste, my pace, my calm.\
\
Clients bring me their vulnerabilities\'97unfinished tracks, insecure mixes, strange decisions, big feelings\'97and trust that I\'92ll help them hear what matters.\
\
It\'92s a responsibility I don\'92t take lightly. I treat mastering as a form of care. A way to finish things not just technically, but psychically. The last 5% can be the most human part of the process.\
\
Outside the studio, my life is fairly minimal. I gravitate toward timeless menswear\'97CDG, Folk, APC, NN07\'97and find satisfaction in the quiet details of form and fabric. I collect titanium EDC tools and take real pleasure in admiring objects like a Chris Reeve folding knife or a Rotring 800 pencil.\
\
I practice the Japanese Zen art of K\uc0\u333 d\u333 \'97the Way of Incense\'97which involves \'93listening\'94 to subtle wood aromas as they reveal themselves under heat. It\'92s a meditative ritual I often share with Maya.\
\
I also build playlists obsessively\'97one every few months to mark a season, each one a 200-track emotional journal. Sound has always been how I frame memory.\
\
I read a lot\'97Bukowski, Rimbaud, Hemingway. I rewatch films that feel like slow dreams: 2001: A Space Odyssey, Solaris, Persona. I walk Ozzy. I stay off Twitter. I think a lot more than I talk. But I\'92ve come to see that quiet doesn\'92t mean unfeeling.\
\
I\'92m autistic. I\'92m highly sensitive. I obsess, I ruminate, I idealize. These used to feel like defects. But I\'92ve started to understand them as the engine behind everything I do well.\
\
Mastering is a refuge for people like me\'97for people who\'92ve been told they\'92re \'93too much,\'94 or who feel the world too sharply. People who need structure, solitude, and the dignity of doing things precisely. If that sounds like you too, you might relate to what I wrote here.\
\
In my best work\'97writing or mastering\'97you\'92ll hear the same philosophy: that consistency is a form of love. That refinement isn\'92t soulless. That sensitivity is a strength. That solitude can be sacred.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\f3\i\b \cf0 \'93Wholeness is not achieved by cutting off a portion of one\'92s being, but by integration of the contraries.\'94\
\
\'97 Carl Jung
\f1\i0\b0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
I\'92m still integrating. Still balancing ambition and acceptance. Still learning how to stay in rhythm with who I really am.\
\
But what I\'92ve built\'97my mastering practice, my voice, this quiet life\'97is proof that you don\'92t have to shout to be heard. You just have to be true.\
\
I didn\'92t become someone else to succeed.\
\
I became more myself.\
\
And I\'92m still becoming.\
\
\uc0\u9854 \u65039 \u9651 }